# Socially Integrated Polysubstance (SIP) system, an open source solution that allows for group housed rodents to self-administer multiple substances with continuous monitoring and measurement

bioRxiv preprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.11.511835v1

Abstract: Despite impressive results from neuroscience research using rodent models, there is a paucity of successful translation from preclinical findings to effective pharmacological interventions for treatment of substance use disorder (SUD) in humans. One potential reason for lack of translation from animal models is difficulty in accurately replicating the lived experience of people who use drugs. Aspects of substance use in humans that are often not modeled in animal research include but are not limited to 1) voluntary timing and frequency of substance intake, 2) social environment during substance use, and 3) access to multiple substances and multiple concentrations of each substance. Critically, existing commercial equipment that allows for social housing and voluntary polysubstance use (e.g., home cage monitoring system) is prohibitively expensive and no open-source solutions exist. With these goals in mind, here we detail development of the Socially Integrated Polysubstance (SIP) system, an open-source and lower cost solution that allows for group housed rodents to self-administer multiple substances with continuous monitoring and measurement. In our current setup, each SIP cage contains four drinking stations, and each station is equipped with a RFID sensor and sipper tube connected to a unique fluid reservoir. Using this system, we can track which animal (implanted with unique RFID transponder) visits which drinking location and the amount they drink during each visit (in 20 ul increments). Using four flavors of Kool-Aid, here we demonstrate that the SIP system is reliable and accurate with high temporal resolution for long term monitoring of substance intake and behavior tracking in a social environment. The SIP cage system is a first step towards designing an accessible and flexible rodent model of substance use that more closely resembles the experience of people who use drugs.
